Cross resonance documentation (#1563)
qiboteam/qibocal: doc/source/protocols/cross_resonance/cross_resonance.rst

Reviewer: Here the reference seems wrong, since it is not rendered

Author: solved in 99f96e13f9c84362fa213152646c9e26c12385f4.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
of fridge lines and allows to decouple from the additional complexity introduced by flux noise.
```

Author: addressed in 92cf2363

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The CR effect was first proposed :cite:p:`CR_First` in and later
```

Author: addressed in ...

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the system is in the dispersive regime (i.e. :math:`|\omega_1 - \omega_2| \gg g`), through a
```

Author: addressed in 92cf2363

    + \frac{\zeta}{4} \sigma_1^z \sigma_2^z
    + \Omega(t) \Big[ \sigma_1^x + \nu \sigma_2^x + \mu \sigma_1^z \sigma_2^x\Big]

If we analyze each single component of the equation above we see:

>   * two free-qubit terms (:math:`\propto \sigma^z_q`) proportional to the effective qubit frequencies :math:`\tilde(\omega)_q`

Reviewer: The `\tilde` over the `\omega` is not rendering properly.

<img width="309" height="127" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/b575b5ed-0acb-4a10-b1c8-0a0072d7f397" />

Author: yeah, confused `()` with `{}`.
Resolved in 99f96e13f9c84362fa213152646c9e26c12385f4.

  * ZZ interaction (:math:`\propto \sigma^z_1\sigma^z_2`) with coupling :math:`\eta` which corresponds to a conditional qubit's frequency shift.
  * drive terms for both qubits (:math:`\propto \sigma^x_q`) with :math:`\nu` corresponding to the quantum crosstalk factor; quantum crosstalk parametrizes the effective coupling between the qubit and the non-directly coupled line.
  * ZX interaction :math:`\sigma_1^z\sigma^x_2` with coupling :\math:`mu` (cross-resonance factor). In particular This term represents a conditional extra rotation along x-axis for qubit-2 depending on the state of qubit-1.

The whole idea of the Cross Resonance gate is then to exploit ZX-term by driving qubit-1 at qubit-2 frequency;
in this scheme it is easy to see that qubit-1 behaves as the control qubit while qubit-2 is the target.

It is easy to prove that the CNOT gate can be built using two single-qubits gates plus the CR gate:

.. math::

    \text{CNOT} = \text{R}_\text{ZX}(-\pi/2) \text{R}_\text{IX}(\pi/2) \text{R}_\text{ZI}(\pi/2)

Hence it is necessary to tune the amplitude and the duration of the CR drive pulse to calibrate a

> :math:`RZX(-pi/2)` rotation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:math:`RZX(-\pi/2)` rotation.
```

Author: resolved in 99f96e13f9c84362fa213152646c9e26c12385f4.

| In Qibocal we provide protocols to calibrate CR pulses based on :cite:p:`CR_IBM`.
| The calibration procedure is based on characterizing all terms of the full effective Hamiltonian via a tomography-style experiment:

.. math::

>   2H_{eff}/\hbar = \Omega_{ZX}\text{ZX} + \Omega_{ZY}\text{ZY} + \Omega_{IX}\text{IX} + \Omega_{IY}\text{IY} + \Omega_{XI}\text{XI} + \Omega_{YI}\text{YI} + \varepsilon\text{ZZ}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  2H_{\text{eff}}/\hbar = \Omega_{ZX}\text{ZX} + \Omega_{ZY}\text{ZY} + \Omega_{IX}\text{IX} + \Omega_{IY}\text{IY} + \Omega_{XI}\text{XI} + \Omega_{YI}\text{YI} + \varepsilon\text{ZZ}
```

Author: resolved in 99f96e13f9c84362fa213152646c9e26c12385f4.

| By measuring the target-qubit response for different states of the control qubit, the strengths of both the desired

> interaction and the accompanying unwanted terms are extracte; these parasitic terms arise from drive crosstalk and

Reviewer: ```suggestion
interaction and the accompanying unwanted terms are extracted; these parasitic terms arise from drive crosstalk and
```

Author: resolved in 99f96e13f9c84362fa213152646c9e26c12385f4.

off-resonant interactions and can significantly affect gate performance.
| The overall strategy is therefore to characterize the error channels at the Hamiltonian level and compensate them through calibrated control pulses.

> | In particular, a rotary drive on the target qubit suppresses unwanted single-qubit rotations (IX, IY),

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| In particular, an oscillating drive on the target qubit suppresses unwanted single-qubit rotations (IX, IY),
```

It's my take, but sounds more intuitive.

> while echo sequences mitigate over essentially ZZ noise.

Reviewer: Maybe, it would be nice to put a picture of what is the base sequence, and another one with the echo sequence.

Possibly, you may label pulses, such that you could refer to them in the main text.

Btw, you could even grab illustrations from papers, and ask AI to restyle them. The sequences are just those anyhow :)

Author: ok I'll work on it.

Reviewer: Done in d2e7cdc832b2c8ba3cf1ba796b662c84a4f298db

By measuring the effective Hamiltonian after each calibration step and iteratively tuning the amplitudes, phases,
and timings of the added pulses, the undesired interactions are progressively removed,
leaving the desired conditional ZX coupling as the dominant term.

> | Also, we can assume that the XI and IY terms (CR pulse driving the control qubit) are essentially small and can be neglected

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Also, we can assume that the XI and YI terms (CR pulse driving the control qubit) are essentially small and can be neglected
```

I'd guess

Author: solved in 99f96e13f9c84362fa213152646c9e26c12385f4.

since in general the two qubits are far in frequency then the CR pulse is far off-resonance with the control.

The CR tune-up procedure consist in three different main steps but executing the full pipeline not required to obtain a
functioning cross-resonance gate; a CR pulse already generates a conditional interaction that can be used as an
entangling gate.

> | The purpose of the procedure is instead to improve performances by suppressing unwanted contributions.

Reviewer: In the best case, the `|` at the beginning have no effect on the rendered docs.
In the worst, they appear literally in the text. Which is happening when they are not applied consistently to each line in a paragraph.

Why did you add them?

Author: I wanted to force a new line without creating a new paragraph.

Reviewer: Not really working. But I would recommend not to do that.

I'm prone myself to structure my replies in many levels, where I have new lines, paragraphs, sections and what not.
But, when you do at microscopic level, with new lines (as I'm doing right now...), it is a bit breaking the flow. It can create emphasis, but that's usually not helpful to the reading.

You could take examples from the usual paper style. Even in LaTeX, it is quite forced to add a line wrap, without a paragraph - and you have to force it.

All in all, the organization in paragraphs is quite good as it is. Just remove the `|`s

Author: ok, addressed in f6d7ae05f50f7c96b9cfeecf44263353805e23b1.

> | The purpose of the procedure is instead to improve performances by suppressing unwanted contributions.

Reviewer: Maybe, somewhere around here, you could turn the broad mentions to the incremental tune-up process in a step-by-step overview.
Just a bullet list, with the steps briefly sketched and summarized, before going into the details in the next sections

Author: addressed in 92cf2363

    + \frac{\zeta}{4} \sigma_1^z \sigma_2^z
    + \Omega(t) \Big[ \sigma_1^x + \nu \sigma_2^x + \mu \sigma_1^z \sigma_2^x\Big]

If we analyze each single component of the equation above we see:

  * two free-qubit terms (:math:`\propto \sigma^z_q`) proportional to the effective qubit frequencies :math:`\tilde{\omega}_q`
  * ZZ interaction (:math:`\propto \sigma^z_1\sigma^z_2`) with coupling :math:`\eta` which corresponds to a conditional qubit's frequency shift.
  * drive terms for both qubits (:math:`\propto \sigma^x_q`) with :math:`\nu` corresponding to the quantum crosstalk factor; quantum crosstalk parametrizes the effective coupling between the qubit and the non-directly coupled line.

>   * ZX interaction :math:`\sigma_1^z\sigma^x_2` with coupling :math:`\mu` (cross-resonance factor). In particular This term represents a conditional extra rotation along x-axis for qubit-2 depending on the state of qubit-1.

Reviewer: Maybe avoid the callout, deindenting the paragraph.

No need to have *also* that, the bullet points are already breaking enough the flow. A callout looks like a parenthesis, and it is disconnected from the neighboring text

<img width="779" height="516" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/b84b6c3c-c6dd-469c-8db1-1a4ee32636da" />

Author: addressed in 92cf2363

>   * ZX interaction :math:`\sigma_1^z\sigma^x_2` with coupling :math:`\mu` (cross-resonance factor). In particular This term represents a conditional extra rotation along x-axis for qubit-2 depending on the state of qubit-1.

Reviewer: You are using inconsistently the parenthesis and `\propto` for the operators. The first three points are homogeneous, and the fourth has a different style.

Either style is fine for me, but make it one ;)

Author: you're right.
addressed in 92cf2363

The whole idea of the Cross Resonance gate is then to exploit ZX-term by driving qubit-1 at qubit-2 frequency;
in this scheme it is easy to see that qubit-1 behaves as the control qubit while qubit-2 is the target.

It is easy to prove that the CNOT gate can be built using two single-qubits gates plus the CR gate:

.. math::

    \text{CNOT} = \text{R}_\text{ZX}(-\pi/2) \text{R}_\text{IX}(\pi/2) \text{R}_\text{ZI}(\pi/2)

Hence it is necessary to tune the amplitude and the duration of the CR drive pulse to calibrate a

> :math:`RZX(-\pi/2)` rotation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:math:`\text{R}_\text{ZX}(-\pi/2)` rotation.
```

For consistency with the style of the equation above.

Author: addressed in 92cf2363

In Qibocal we provide protocols to calibrate CR pulses based on :cite:p:`CR_IBM`.
The calibration procedure is based on characterizing all terms of the full effective Hamiltonian via a tomography-style experiment:

.. math::

  2H_{\text{eff}}/\hbar = \Omega_{ZX}\text{ZX} + \Omega_{ZY}\text{ZY} + \Omega_{IX}\text{IX} + \Omega_{IY}\text{IY} + \Omega_{XI}\text{XI} + \Omega_{YI}\text{YI} + \varepsilon\text{ZZ}

By measuring the target-qubit response for different states of the control qubit, the strengths of both the desired
interaction and the accompanying unwanted terms are extracted; these parasitic terms arise from drive crosstalk and
off-resonant interactions and can significantly affect gate performance.
The overall strategy is therefore to characterize the error channels at the Hamiltonian level and compensate them through calibrated control pulses.

In particular, an oscillating drive on the target qubit suppresses unwanted single-qubit rotations (IX, IY),

> while echo sequences mitigate over essentially ZZ noise.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
while echo sequences mitigate ZZ contribution.
```

Author: addressed in 92cf2363

By measuring the effective Hamiltonian after each calibration step and iteratively tuning the amplitudes, phases,
and timings of the added pulses, the undesired interactions are progressively removed,
leaving the desired conditional ZX coupling as the dominant term.
Also, we can assume that the XI and YI terms (CR pulse driving the control qubit) are essentially small and can be neglected
since in general the two qubits are far in frequency then the CR pulse is far off-resonance with the control.

Here there is a schematic representation of the two pulse sequences, with and without echo:

.. image:: CR_sequences.png

The CR tune-up procedure consist in three different main steps but executing the full pipeline not required to obtain a
functioning cross-resonance gate; a CR pulse already generates a conditional interaction that can be used as an
entangling gate.

> The purpose of the procedure is instead to improve performances by suppressing unwanted contributions.

Reviewer: Here the grammar can be quite improved. Ask AI

Author: addressed in 92cf2363

includes two out of phase CR pulses of equal length, bringing the total sequence duration to :math:`2\tau_{\text{CR}} + 2\tau_{\pi}`.

Post-processing
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

| The target qubit's state probability is fitted simultaneously across all three axes for both control state preparations,
as the trajectories are physically constrained by the unitarity of the state norm.
| Although theoretically exact, enforcing this constraint can make the fit highly sensitive to experimental errors and
data fluctuations.

Once the two trajectories (for control prepared in :math:`\{0,1\}`) are fitted to obtain the oscillation frequencies
:math:`\vec{\Omega}^{\{0, 1\}}`, the Hamiltonian coefficients can be extracted using the following system of equations:

.. math::

  \Omega_{ZX} = \frac{\Omega^0_X - \Omega^1_X}{2}
  \Omega_{IX} = \frac{\Omega^0_X + \Omega^1_X}{2}
  \Omega_{ZY} = \frac{\Omega^0_Y - \Omega^1_Y}{2}
  \Omega_{IY} = \frac{\Omega^0_Y + \Omega^1_Y}{2}
  \Omega_{ZZ} = \frac{\Omega^0_Z - \Omega^1_Z}{2}
  \Omega_{IZ} = \frac{\Omega^0_Z + \Omega^1_Z}{2}

Finally the CR gate optimal duration is estimated by minimizing the Bloch vector norm :math:`|\vec{R}|` defined as:

.. math::

>   |\vec{R}| = \frac{1}{2}\sqrt((\langle X \rangle_0 + \langle X \rangle_1)^2 + (\langle Y \rangle_0 + \langle Y \rangle_1)^2 + (\langle Z \rangle_0 + \langle Z \rangle_1)^2)

Reviewer: The square root is not rendered properly

<img width="547" height="96" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/349dfcb8-e8d7-4641-85bb-fc77356bcbd6" />

Author: solved in 99f96e13f9c84362fa213152646c9e26c12385f4.

Post-processing
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

The post-processing is the same as for the CR-duration experiment.

> Phase calibration of CR and cancellation drives

Reviewer: Maybe we could open an issue to add a toggle for the cancellation pulse.

There is no strong reason not to calibrate also the cancellation pulse. But it is true that, if you have a good enough cross-resonance, and for any reason the calibration of the cancellation fails, you may still want to deliver a gate with a lower performance. But the phase is also essential for the gate.

Author: ok, created issue #1589

.. code-block:: yaml

  - id: cancellation_phase_tuning
    operation: cancellation_phase_tuning
    parameters:
      duration_range:
      - 10
      - 210
      - 20
    echo: true
    phase_range:
      - 0.0
      - 7.1
      - 1.0
    nshots: 1000
    relaxation_time: 50000

The expected output is the following:

.. image:: cr_phase_tuning.png

> Amplitude calibration cancellation drive

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Amplitude calibration of the cancellation drive
```

Author: solved in 99f96e13f9c84362fa213152646c9e26c12385f4.

> ----------------------------------

Reviewer: Missing a `Parameters` section

Author: solved in 99f96e13f9c84362fa213152646c9e26c12385f4.

| This final step is necessary to cancel out the remaining single-qubit drive terms affecting the target qubit
(IX and IY).
| Having determined the phases for both the CR and cancellation pulses, this protocol sweeps the cancellation
pulse amplitude over varying CR durations. At each step, the protocol extracts the coefficients of all
Hamiltonian terms.
| Unlike the phase tuning protocol, this experiment applies a linear fit exclusively to the measured
IX and IY terms to determine the two zero-interaction amplitudes.

> | As described in :cite:p:`CR_IBM`, the two nulling amplitudes for IX and IY should theoretically coincide.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| As described in :cite:p:`CR_IBM`, the two nulling amplitudes for IX and IY should coincide, since the cancellation pulse phase is aligned with the expected rotation axis.
```

Author: solved in 99f96e13f9c84362fa213152646c9e26c12385f4.

| If they diverge, iterating the experiment with adjusted :math:`\phi_{CR}` and :math:`\phi_{Canc}` phases may be required.

> | By default, however, the protocol simply selects the amplitude :math:`a_{Canc}` that nulls the $IY$ term;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| By default, however, the protocol simply selects the amplitude :math:`a_{Canc}` that nulls the IY term;
```

Author: solved in 99f96e13f9c84362fa213152646c9e26c12385f4.

phase is aligned with the expected rotation axis.
If they diverge, iterating the experiment with adjusted :math:`\phi_{CR}` and :math:`\phi_{Canc}` phases may be required.

By default, however, the protocol simply selects the amplitude :math:`a_{Canc}` that nulls the IY term;
while this does not entirely eliminate all parasitic rotations, it successfully cancels out the rotations
orthogonal to the primary ZX interaction.

Parameters
^^^^^^^^^^

.. autoclass:: qibocal.protocols.two_qubit_interaction.cross_resonance.cancellation_amplitude.HamiltonianTomographyCANCAmplParameters
  :noindex:

Example
^^^^^^^

A possible runcard to launch the experiment could be the following:

.. code-block:: yaml

  - id: cancellation_amplitude_tuning
    operation: cancellation_amplitude_tuning
    parameters:
      duration_range:
      - 10
      - 210
      - 20
      echo: true
      target_ampl_range:
      - 0.0
      - 0.4
      - 0.1
    nshots: 1000
    relaxation_time: 50000

The expected output is the following:

.. image:: canc_ampl_tuning.png

.. note::
The `cancellation_phase_tuning` and `cancellation_amplitude_tuning` protocols support an additional

> input parameter, `verbose_plot`. It defaults to `False`; enabling it (`True``) generates plots of

Reviewer: In ReStructuredText, the code-style is denoted with double backticks, <code>``</code>.

```suggestion
The ``cancellation_phase_tuning`` and ``cancellation_amplitude_tuning`` protocols support an additional
input parameter, ``verbose_plot``. It defaults to ``False``; enabling it (``True``) generates plots of
```

Reviewer: Btw, in principle you can also reference the exact object, which would create a link to the documentation.

But, for the time being, our API documentation is quite messy. Forget this for some more time

Author: addressed in 92cf2363
